Vaccines Update: Sputnik V (#856)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/22.vaccines.md

#### COVID-19 Vaccine AstraZeneca

> #### Sputnik-V (Gam-COVID-Vac and Gam-COVID-Vac-Lyo)

Author: I think it is recognized as both. If you hear of them in the media they go by sputnik V. I think Putin named them that way. Either will be recognized.

The vaccine Gam-COVID-Vac, nicknamed Sputnik V in reference to the space race, was developed by the Gamaleya National Center of Epidemiology and Microbiology in Moscow. 
Gamaleya is an organization with prior experience using the adenovirus platform for the development of vaccines for the Middle East respiratory system and Ebola virus, although neither of the previous vaccines were internationally licensed [@url:https://www.who.int/immunization/sage/meetings/2018/october/2_Ebola_SAGE2018Oct_BgDoc_20180919.pdf].

> The development of Sputnik V was financed by the Russian Direct Investment Fund [@doi:ft7j; @doi:ghs3sn]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The development of Sputnik V was financed by the Russian Direct Investment Fund [@doi:10/ft7j; @doi:10/ghs3sn]. 
```
Thank you for doing the short dois! Their syntax is tricky.

Author: oops... it is always the lancet journals have these weird dois

Sputnik V is a replication deficient recombinant adenovirus vaccine that combines two adenovirus vectors rAd26-S and rAd5-S that express the full-length SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. 
However, these vectors are intramuscularly administered individually using two separate vaccines in a prime-boost regimen. 
The rAd26-S is administered first, followed by rAd5-S 21 days later.

> Both vaccines deliver 10^11 viral particles per dose. 

Author: Superscript here

This approach is designed to overcome any potential pre-existing immunity to adenovirus in the population [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00191-4] as some individuals may possess immunity to Ad5 [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.05.025].

> Sputnik V is the only recombinant adenovirus vaccine to utilize two vectors, unlike other vaccines such as the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine, which utilizes the chimpanzee adenovirus vector (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19) for both doses [@doi:ghpghz].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sputnik V is the only recombinant adenovirus vaccine to utilize two vectors.
Other vaccines, such as the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine, utilize the chimpanzee adenovirus vector (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19) for both doses [@doi:10/ghpghz].
```

> The Sputnik V vaccines are available in both a lyophilized (Gam-COVID-Vac-Lyo) and frozen form (Gan-COVID-Vac), which are stored at 2-8°C and -18°C respectively [@doi:gg96hq]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sputnik V vaccines are available in both a lyophilized (Gam-COVID-Vac-Lyo) and frozen form (Gan-COVID-Vac), which are stored at 2-8°C and -18°C respectively [@doi:10/gg96hq]. 
```

> The Sputnik V vaccines are available in both a lyophilized (Gam-COVID-Vac-Lyo) and frozen form (Gan-COVID-Vac), which are stored at 2-8 °C and -18 °C respectively [@doi:gg96hq]. 

Author: ```suggestion
The Sputnik V vaccines are available in both a lyophilized (Gam-COVID-Vac-Lyo) and frozen form (Gan-COVID-Vac), which are stored at 2-8°C and -18°C respectively [@doi:gg96hq]. 
```

> The Sputnik V vaccines are available in both a lyophilized (Gam-COVID-Vac-Lyo) and frozen form (Gan-COVID-Vac), which are stored at 2-8 °C and -18 °C respectively [@doi:gg96hq]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sputnik V vaccines are available in both a lyophilized (Gam-COVID-Vac-Lyo) and a frozen form (Gan-COVID-Vac), which are stored at 2 to 8 °C and -18 °C, respectively [@doi:gg96hq]. 
```

Author: This won't let me confirm the commit - says it is out of date

> The lyophilized vaccine is convenient for distribution and storage, particularly to remote or disadvantaged areas [@doi:10:3390/v13010054].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lyophilized vaccine is convenient for distribution and storage, particularly to remote or disadvantaged areas [@doi:10.3390/v13010054].
```

> In the race to develop vaccines against SARS-CoV-2, President Vladimir Putin of Russia announced the approval of the Sputnik V vaccines on August 11th 2020 in the absence of clinical evidence [@doi:ft7j]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the race to develop vaccines against SARS-CoV-2, President Vladimir Putin of Russia announced the approval of the Sputnik V vaccines on August 11th, 2020 in the absence of clinical evidence [@doi:10/ft7j]. 
```

> Consequently, many international scientific agencies and public health bodies expressed concern because due diligence to the clinical trial process was subverted for the sake of expediency leading many to question the safety and efficacy of Sputnik V [@doi:10.1126/science.abe3147; @url:https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/11/scientists-worry-whether-russias-sputnik-v-coronavirus-vaccine-is-safe-and-effective.html; @doi:ft7j].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consequently, many international scientific agencies and public health bodies expressed concern that due diligence to the clinical trial process was subverted for the sake of expediency, leading many to question the safety and efficacy of Sputnik V [@doi:10.1126/science.abe3147; @url:https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/11/scientists-worry-whether-russias-sputnik-v-coronavirus-vaccine-is-safe-and-effective.html; @doi:ft7j].
```

> Despite regulatory, safety, and efficacy concerns, pre-orders for 1 billion doses of the Sputnik V were reported within days of the vaccine's approval in Russia [@doi:ft7j].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite regulatory, safety, and efficacy concerns, pre-orders for 1 billion doses of the Sputnik V were reported within days of the vaccine's approval in Russia [@doi:10/ft7j].
```

> Almost a month later, the phase I/II trial data was published [@doi:gg96hq].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Almost a month later, the phase I/II trial data was published [@doi:10/gg96hq].
```

In the phase I/II trial study conducted between late June and early August 2020, 76 participants (18-60 years old) were split into two groups of 38 participants, which were non-randomised in two hospitals in Russia. 
In phase I, 9 patients received rAd26 and 9 patients received rAd5-S to assess safety over 28 days. 

> In phase II, at least 5 days post the completion of phase I, 20 patients received a prime-boost vaccination of rAd26-S on day 0 and rAd5-S on day 2, which was administered intramuscularly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In phase II, at least 5 days after the completion of phase I, 20 patients received a prime-boost vaccination of rAd26-S on day 0 and rAd5-S on day 2, which was administered intramuscularly.
```

The phase I/II trial reported that both vaccines were deemed safe and well tolerated. 

> The most common adverse events reported were mild with pain at the injection site (58%), hypothermia (50%), headaches (42%), fatigue (28%), and joint and muscle pain (24%). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common adverse events reported were mild, such as pain at the injection site (58%), hypothermia (50%), headaches (42%), fatigue (28%), and joint and muscle pain (24%). 
```

> Seroconversion was observed in all participants three weeks post the second vaccination (day 42) and all participants produced antibodies to the SARS-CoV-2 glycoprotein. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Seroconversion was observed in all participants three weeks post the second vaccination (day 42), and all participants produced antibodies to the SARS-CoV-2 glycoprotein. 
```

> Receptor binding domain-specific IgG were high (14,703 and 11,143 respectively), indicating a sufficient immune response from both the frozen and lyophilized versions of the vaccine. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RBD-specific IgG levels were high in both the frozen and lyophilized versions of the vaccine (14,703 and 11,143 respectively), indicating a sufficient immune response to both.
```
The RBD acronym is used a few other places in the manuscript, so we should be able to use it here too!

> Three weeks post the second vaccination, the virus-neutralizing geometric mean antibody titers were 49.25 and 45.95 from the frozen and lyophilized vaccines respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Three weeks post the second vaccination, the virus-neutralizing geometric mean antibody titers were 49.25 and 45.95 from the frozen and lyophilized vaccines, respectively.
```
Is there a threshold or anything to compare this against? I'm not sure we mention it in the mRNA section (maybe we should?) and it's not a scale I'm familiar with, at least!

Author: I'm not sure what the threshold is or if there even is one: the geometric mean titer (GMT) is the average antibody titer for the study group (n = the total participants) calculated by multiplying all values and taking the nth root of this number. Its a way of standardizing the data I believe. I'm not sure it is comparable between papers necessarily or between different types of antibodies. The calculation comes from the assay and how the sera/blood of patients is diluted and the neutralizing capacity is observed until eventually the blood/sera is diluted enough that the constituent neutralizing antibodies no longer neutralize. This calculation is criticized though as it hides if there are non-responders to the vaccine. Although this trial reported the number of seroconverters (100% by day 42).

> At 28 days, median cell proliferation of 1.3% CD4+ and 1.1% CD8+ were reported for the lyophilized vaccine and 2.5% CD4+ and 1.3% CD8+ for the vaccine stored frozen. 

Author: Superscripts here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At 28 days, median cell proliferation of 1.3% CD^4+^ and 1.1% CD^8+^ were reported for the lyophilized vaccine and 2.5% CD^4+^ and 1.3% CD^8+^ for the vaccine stored frozen. 
```
Did I do this right? I feel like I've usually seen them without superscripts, and I realized I don't actually know how to do it correctly!!!

Author: They appear both with and without superscript. I think the correct way is that just the + is superscript. Did I do it correctly @rando2 ? haha

Reviewer: Yes you did!!!

> These results indicated that both forms of Sputnik V appeared to be safe and induce a humoral and cellular response to the vaccines [@doi:gg96hq], which may be robust enough to subsist and not wane rapidly [@doi:ghx7xz]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These results indicated that both forms of Sputnik V appeared to be safe and induce a humoral and cellular response in human subjects [@doi:10/gg96hq], which may be robust enough to persist and not wane rapidly [@doi:10/ghx7xz]. 
```

> A press release on November 11th reported positive results from an interim analysis of the phase III Sputnik V trials, which reported 92% efficacy in 16,000 volunteers [@doi:10.1126/science.abf6791].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A press release on November 11th, 2020 indicated positive results from an interim analysis of the phase III Sputnik V trials, which reported 92% efficacy in 16,000 volunteers [@doi:10.1126/science.abf6791].
```

> However, this was only two days after both Pfizer and BioNTech reported that their vaccines had an efficacy over 90%, which led to significant speculation about the Russian findings for a myriad of reasons including the lack of a published protocol and the “reckless” approval of the vaccine in Russia months prior to the publication of the interim results of the phase III trial [@doi:10.1126/science.abf6791; @doi:10.1038/d41586-020-03209-0].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this release came only two days after both Pfizer and BioNTech reported that their vaccines had an efficacy over 90%, which led to significant skepticism of the Russian findings for a myriad of reasons including the lack of a published protocol and the “reckless” approval of the vaccine in Russia months prior to the publication of the interim results of the phase III trial [@doi:10.1126/science.abf6791; @doi:10.1038/d41586-020-03209-0].
```
Does skepticism work here? Some of the concerns listed don't seem speculative to me, if that makes sense!

Author: Yes, skepticism is better here

> In February 2021, the interim results of the phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial were eventually published in the _Lancet_ [@doi:ghxj4g].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In February 2021, the interim results of the phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial were eventually published in _The Lancet_ [@doi:10/ghxj4g].
```

The multicenter trial enrolled 21,862 participants over the age of 18 years old in Moscow, Russia. 

> The participants were randomly assigned to receive either a 0.5 mL/dose of vaccine or placebo (vaccine buffer composition) intramuscularly using the same prime-boost regimen as the phase I/II trials. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The participants were randomly assigned to receive either a 0.5 mL/dose of vaccine or placebo, which was comprised of the vaccine buffer composition, that was delivered intramuscularly using the same prime-boost regimen as in the phase I/II trials. 
```

> From September 7th to Nov 24th, 19,866 completed the trial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From September 7th to Nov 24th, 19,866 participants completed the trial.
```

> Of the 14,964 participants who received the vaccine, 16 (0.1%) were confirmed to have COVID-19.
> Whereas 62 of the 4,902 participants (1.3%) in the placebo group were confirmed to have COVID-19. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of the 14,964 participants who received the vaccine, 16 (0.1%) were confirmed to have COVID-19, whereas 62 of the 4,902 participants (1.3%) in the placebo group were confirmed to have COVID-19. 
```

Of these participants, no moderate or severe cases of COVID-19 were reported in the vaccine group, juxtaposed with 20 in the placebo group.
However, only symptomatic individuals were confirmed for SARS-CoV-2 infection in this trial. 

> Therefore, asymptomatic infections were not detected, thus potentially inflating the efficacy data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, asymptomatic infections were not detected, thus potentially inflating the efficacy estimate.
```

Overall, a vaccine efficacy of 91.6% (95% CI 85.6-95.2) was reported, where an efficacy of 91.8% was reported for those over 60 years old and 92.7% for those who were 51-60 years old. 
Indeed, 14 days after the first dose, 87.6% efficacy was achieved and the immunity required to prevent disease occurred within 18 days of vaccination. 

> Hence, scientists are investigating a single dose regimen of the rAd26-S sputnik V vaccine [@doi:10.1136/bmj.n309].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on these results, scientists are investigating the potential for a single dose regimen of the rAd26-S sputnik V vaccine [@doi:10.1136/bmj.n309].
```

> By the end of the trial, 7,485 participants reported adverse events of which 94% were grade I.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of the trial, 7,485 participants reported adverse events, of which 94% were grade I.
```

> Of the 68 participants who experienced serious adverse events during the trial,  45 from the vaccine group and 23 from the placebo groups, none were reported to be associated with the vaccination. 

Reviewer: I am a little curious who is making these calls? Russia is not exactly known for live-and-let-live politicians...

Author: Your guess is as good as mine. Hence why further down I quoted the "reckless" approval of the vaccine. They are using a well-established adenovirus platform but against a novel disease. They really risked a lot of lives. Gambeleya scientists wrote the papers on the vaccine and they mention an "independent" monitoring group but never give a name. I will see if there is anything on their website on that. If you take a look at their website, they claim that a survey they conducted shows that Russian citizens and citizens of other countries think Sputnik V is safer than the other vaccines in production 🙄

Author: "Independent data monitoring committee" https://sputnikvaccine.com/about-vaccine/clinical-trials/

🤷‍♂️

Reviewer: Oh goodness! Well, I really hope the independent monitoring committee was right about this...

> Likewise, 4 deaths occurred during the trial period that were not related to the vaccine [@doi:ghxj4g].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, 4 deaths occurred during the trial period that were not related to the vaccine [@doi:10/ghxj4g].
```

> The interim findings of the phase III trial indicates that the Sputnik V vaccine regimen appears to be safe with 91.6% efficacy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interim findings of the phase III trial indicate that the Sputnik V vaccine regimen appears to be safe with 91.6% efficacy.
```

Moving forward, Gambelaya intends to reach a total of 40,000 participants for the completion of their phase III trial.  
Indeed, other trials involving Sputnik V are currently underway in Belarus, India, the United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela [@url:https://sputnikvaccine.com/about-vaccine/].

> Preliminary results of a trial of Argentinian healthcare workers in Buenos Aires who were vaccinated with the Sputnik V rAd26-R vector-based vaccine seems to support the short term safety of the first vaccination [https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.03.21251071]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preliminary results of a trial of Argentinian healthcare workers in Buenos Aires who were vaccinated with the Sputnik V rAd26-R vector-based vaccine seems to support the short term safety of the first vaccination [@url:https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.03.21251071]. 
```
